Analyzing the task structure and identifying required components
I am assessing the relationship between the files to determine how they interact and what functionality they collectively support
Considering potential dependencies and the purpose of each file in the broader context
Evaluating whether additional context or clarification is needed to proceed confidently
Validating the mathematical correctness of the Mandelbrot and Sierpinski constructions through formal proof
I am ensuring that each law in the foundational system is rigorously verified by logical deduction
Every assertion about geometric patterns is confirmed to align with its underlying mathematical definition
The entire structure stands as a coherent, self-consistent demonstration of truth
Exploring the foundational constraints and expressive capabilities of the system
I am assessing what can be formally established within the framework's affine, pure, and terminating nature
Considering how structural recursion and pattern matching enable proofs through definitional equality
Reflecting on the implications of parallelism and tree-shaped fork structures for computational design
Exploring computational patterns for fractal generation with an eye toward efficient parallel execution.
Considering how iterative processes like the Mandelbrot set and bitwise logic in the Sierpinski triangle can be mapped to parallelizable operations.
Evaluating structural approaches that leverage inherent symmetries and recursive properties to minimize redundancy.
Shaping a strategy that aligns mathematical elegance with execution efficiency across distributed computation units.
Exploring the structural implications of recursive parallelism.
I am analyzing which properties emerge naturally from pure computations and can be formally verified.
Certain deterministic transformations-like character mappings, string constructions, and membership predicates-lend themselves to proof due to their well-defined behavior.
In contrast, effects involving input/output or complex numerical approximations resist rigorous verification, especially when relying on inductive reasoning over expansive data structures.
Exploring provable mathematical structures within computational constraints.
I am focusing on discrete, structurally defined operations like bitwise and arithmetic on unsigned integers, which allow for formal reasoning.
These operations enable me to model geometric patterns such as the Sierpinski triangle through combinatorial properties of binary representations.
The elegance lies in deriving visual fractal behavior from purely logical and constructive principles.
Exploring the pattern of the Sierpinski triangle through bitwise logic.
I am examining various formulations involving bitwise operations to identify the correct condition for filled positions.
The core idea revolves around submask relationships and binary representations of row and column indices.
I am refining my understanding by testing different logical equivalences to match the visual structure.
Exploring the mathematical foundation of the Sierpinski triangle through bitwise logic.
I am verifying that a cell in row r, position c is filled precisely when c is a submask of r, based on Lucas' theorem and properties of binomial coefficients modulo 2.
This equivalence arises from the fact that odd entries in Pascal's triangle correspond exactly to such submask relationships.
I am also considering the implications of computational precision and how it affects formal verification in other domains like the Mandelbrot set.
Exploring the structural properties of the Sierpinski triangle through logical inference
I am examining the inherent patterns in bitwise operations to establish foundational truths about the construction.
Each row exhibits predictable filled positions due to the behavior of bitwise AND with zero and self.
These observations form a basis for proving symmetry and size constraints within the triangular structure.
Attempting to establish a foundational property through structural induction on word representation.
Exploring the recursive nature of bitwise operations and their behavior with zero values across bit levels.
Considering case analysis on individual bits and the logical reduction of boolean conjunctions.
Recognizing that each recursive step must be justified, leading toward a systematic proof by induction.
Exploring structural matches on bound variables to verify equivalence.
I am analyzing how pattern matching on boolean values and word structures can be used to establish inductive properties.
Each case is evaluated by reducing expressions and leveraging induction hypotheses.
The goal is to ensure consistency between constructed terms and their expected forms.
Exploring provable properties of bitwise operations within the Sierpinski and Mandelbrot contexts
I am focusing on foundational identities that can be mechanically verified, such as the absorption of zero and self-identity under bitwise AND, which align with well-behaved algebraic patterns.
These choices are deliberate: they avoid speculative or complex recursion while grounding reasoning in structural equality and constructive proof.
The goal is to establish reliable, minimal truths that serve as building blocks for deeper exploration.
Focusing on verifiable cases through direct computation.
I am identifying simple, concrete instances where the outcomes can be confirmed by reduction rather than complex reasoning.
By selecting ground terms that evaluate immediately, I ensure correctness without relying on induction or abstract proofs.
This approach prioritizes clarity and reliability in establishing foundational truths.
Exploring the feasibility of fixed-point arithmetic for Mandelbrot computation to enable provable properties.
Considering whether to prioritize mathematical rigor in iteration logic or focus on verifiable output generation.
Deciding to use floating-point for the core iteration, accepting its opacity in exchange for clarity and simplicity.
Shifting focus to proving the correctness of character mapping and string construction instead.
Rendering fractal images using parallel computation strategies
I am exploring how to efficiently generate visual representations of mathematical sets by leveraging parallel execution.
By dividing the image into sections, I can compute distinct parts simultaneously, improving performance without compromising accuracy.
The approach aligns with a balanced decomposition strategy, ensuring work is distributed evenly across available resources.
Refining the approach to align with foundational principles of structural recursion
I am reconsidering the use of type-specific patterns, recognizing that certain types inherently resist direct pattern matching due to their computational nature
This leads me to prioritize a more principled design where recursion depth is managed through a type that supports natural induction
The result is a cleaner, more mathematically grounded structure that respects both semantics and implementation constraints
Exploring the structure of computation for the Mandelbrot set with an eye toward parallel execution.
Considering the use of a fuel-based iteration mechanism paired with floating-point arithmetic for accurate rendering.
Contemplating how to decompose the image into independent segments, enabling a balanced fork tree pattern that mirrors parallel evaluation.
Reflecting on the pedagogical purpose of demonstrating concurrency through clean, structured decomposition rather than performance optimization.
Exploring foundational properties to establish logical consistency in the system.
I am examining whether basic bitwise operations hold universally, particularly focusing on the identity of zero under conjunction.
This involves reasoning about the structure of finite words and their behavior under operations, using induction to verify invariants across all possible values.
The goal is to ground higher-level assertions in unshakable computational truths.
Proceeding with the proof by analyzing the reduction behavior of Boolean and word-level conjunctions.
I recognize that the expression Bool.and(head, False{}) must be evaluated carefully since head is a variable, not a constructor. Although the definition of Bool.and suggests it reduces regardless of the first argument's value, the system only performs reduction when the first argument is known to be a constructor.
Therefore, I must case-split on head to handle both possible values-True{} and False{}-to ensure each branch reduces correctly to False{}.
This case analysis is necessary because the proof checker cannot automatically reduce the expression when head remains unbound.
Proceeding with the proof by induction on the natural number parameter.
The base case is trivial as both sides reduce to the same form.
For the inductive step, the structure of the word is analyzed based on its head, and the recursive call is applied under the assumption that the property holds for smaller instances.
Each case aligns the resulting expressions through equational reasoning, ensuring consistency with the expected outcome.
Proving the equality by substitution based on a given equivalence.
I am reasoning through the structure of the expression to identify how one term can be replaced with another.
The key insight is recognizing that the equality establishes a relationship between two forms, allowing one to be substituted for the other in context.
This substitution preserves logical validity and simplifies the expression toward the desired form.
Attempting to simplify the expression by leveraging symmetry in equality
I recognize that directly substituting one side for another isn't working because the direction is reversed
By applying symmetry, I can reframe the equality to allow replacement in the desired direction
This adjustment enables me to rewrite the term as intended while preserving logical equivalence
Exploring foundational properties of the Sierpinski triangle through formal verification.
I am simplifying the approach by focusing on ground-term equalities that evaluate directly through computation.
The goal is to establish basic, verifiable truths about filled positions in the triangle's apex and first row.
This strategy avoids complex rewriting and ensures clarity and correctness.
Exploring foundational properties through computational verification and inductive reasoning
I am focusing on laws that are both verifiable and meaningful, choosing those grounded in direct computation for reliability.
The Sierpinski triangle's structural emptiness at a specific position emerges naturally from bitwise logic, while the Mandelbrot character mapping reflects a clean, predictable transformation.
To deepen insight, I'm also considering an inductive principle that connects pattern formation with logical consistency across layers.
Exploring parallel computation through recursive decomposition.
I am considering how to structure rendering tasks into independent, concurrently executable units.
By dividing work hierarchically, I aim to leverage inherent parallelism in fractal generation.
This approach enables efficient utilization of computational resources while maintaining structural clarity.
Exploring a recursive decomposition strategy for structured output generation
I am considering how to divide the problem into manageable parts without relying on complex arithmetic operations
The focus is on maintaining clarity and simplicity by using structural boundaries rather than numerical division
This approach ensures predictable behavior while preserving the inherent symmetry of the pattern
Exploring efficient parallel computation through recursive decomposition
I am considering ways to structure rendering tasks without relying on complex arithmetic like division
Instead, I focus on splitting work at fixed levels of depth to enable simultaneous execution
This approach ensures predictable performance while maintaining clean, scalable design
Rendering the fractal using a divide and conquer strategy with parallel computation for each half.
I am considering how to split the work efficiently while maintaining clarity in the structure.
Each recursive step divides the task into two independent parts, allowing parallel execution.
The final image is assembled by combining the results from both halves, preserving the overall shape and symmetry.
Refining the approach to ensure effectful operations are properly isolated from pure computations.
I am focusing on maintaining a clear separation between side-effecting actions and pure expressions.
The design leverages parallel composition within pure functions to maximize efficiency without compromising safety.
This ensures that I/O operations remain atomic and predictable, while computation is efficiently distributed.
Exploring parallel execution patterns to visualize recursive structure.
I am considering how recursive decomposition creates a fork tree with logarithmic depth and exponential branching, where each split generates independent tasks.
The shape of the tree reflects the divide-and-conquer nature of the computation, with work distributed across levels in a balanced manner.
Though GPU acceleration could apply, the divergence in rendering logic suggests CPU-based parallelism better suits the task's intent.
Constructing a recursive rendering of Sierpinski triangle rows by depth.
I begin by handling the base case where depth is zero, directly rendering a single row.
For greater depths, I split the task into two halves: an upper and lower section, each governed by the same recursive structure but offset in row position.
The size of each section is determined by powers of two, computed efficiently through recursion to maintain alignment with the fractal's geometric progression.
Exploring the structure of iterative computation for fractal generation.
Considering how conditional logic can be encoded through pattern matching on boolean outcomes.
Recognizing the need to propagate computed states as explicit parameters to maintain logical flow.
Reframing the algorithm to align with functional constraints while preserving correctness.
Refining the recursive escape depth computation with a helper function to comply with pattern matching constraints.
The design necessity arises from the requirement that matches must examine only direct parameters, not derived values.
This structural constraint necessitates splitting the logic into distinct functions for clarity and correctness.
The character mapping then translates computed depth into an appropriate visual symbol for display.
Mapping depth to visual characters with a clear, provable logic
I am refining the visualization of the Mandelbrot set by assigning characters based on whether a point escapes or remains within the set.
The decision hinges on a simple binary condition: if the iteration count reaches the maximum, the point is considered inside and rendered as a space.
Otherwise, it is marked with a sharp symbol, ensuring clarity and consistency in the output.
Refining the approach to simplify the classification logic
I am focusing on streamlining the conditional structure by reducing nested checks to a clear two-case pattern.
This allows for more readable and maintainable code while preserving the intended behavior.
The emphasis is on clarity and elegance in expressing the core logic.
Rendering the fractal patterns in parallel with recursive decomposition
I am orchestrating the generation of intricate visual structures by breaking down each fractal into smaller, independent components that can be computed simultaneously.
Each component contributes to a larger whole, maintaining the self-similar nature of the patterns while optimizing performance through concurrent evaluation.
The final output emerges as a harmonious blend of form and efficiency, where structure and computation intertwine seamlessly.
Revising the approach to ensure termination in recursive structures.
I am addressing the challenge of structural recursion by replacing unsigned integer indexing with natural numbers, which support proper descent in recursive calls.
This change aligns the implementation with the termination checker's expectations while preserving correctness.
The adjustment enables safe, well-founded recursion across all levels of the construction.
Verifying the structural correctness of recursive pattern generation through logical inspection.
Examining cell fill conditions by evaluating bitwise operations and equality checks across coordinate pairs.
Confirming consistency with expected fractal behavior by tracing outcomes for specific row-column combinations.
Ensuring each step aligns with the underlying mathematical structure governing the pattern's formation.
Exploring deeper properties of computational structures through formal reasoning.
I am considering how to establish a universal truth about a binary pattern's initial column, leveraging logical induction over bit representations.
The core challenge lies in demonstrating that a bitwise operation with zero always yields zero, regardless of input.
This requires unfolding the nature of zero in bit-level arithmetic and affirming its invariance across all values.
Exploring the logical structure of bitwise operations to establish equivalence.
The challenge lies in reducing a variable-dependent expression to zero, which requires more than syntactic equality.
A deeper inductive argument is necessary to confirm that any value ANDed with zero yields zero.
This insight guides the construction of a formal proof grounded in the properties of the operation.
Verifying that bitwise AND with zero yields zero across all bit lengths.
I am examining the recursive structure of binary words to confirm the identity holds for both base and inductive cases.
In the case where the most significant bit is true, the operation reduces to a conjunction with false, resulting in false, which aligns with the expected zero pattern.
The inductive hypothesis ensures consistency across the remaining bits, preserving correctness throughout the recursion.
Applying the inductive hypothesis to simplify the expression.
The equality between the two terms follows from symmetry of equality and the established identity.
Replacing the complex term with its equivalent zero value preserves the structure.
The resulting comparison reduces to a trivial reflexivity.
Rewriting the equality to align with the target structure.
I am adjusting the direction of the equivalence to match the required substitution pattern.
The symmetry of the equality allows me to reverse the sides for proper application.
This ensures the correct term replaces the placeholder in the goal.
Verifying the identity of bitwise AND with zero across all bit lengths.
I am confirming that applying a bitwise AND operation between any word and a zero word yields the zero word, by structural induction on the bit length.
For each case, I examine the most significant bit and rely on the inductive hypothesis to equate the resulting tail portions.
The symmetry of equality ensures the overall equivalence holds regardless of the leading bit's value.
Verifying the equivalence of the two expressions under the given reduction rules.
The logical and operation correctly simplifies both cases to a false result due to the defined matching behavior.
The structure of the word-level operation aligns consistently with the expected form after reduction.
The symmetry in the rewrite confirms the validity of the transformation within the system's constraints.
Rewriting the expression by substituting one term with another based on equality.
I identify the target subterm to replace and its equivalent value from a known identity.
The substitution transforms the equation into a reflexive form where both sides are identical.
This confirms the validity of the original statement through structural equivalence.
Reorienting the equality to align with the rewrite direction
I recognize that the initial equality must be reversed to match the intended substitution.
By applying symmetry, I transform the equation so the target term becomes the left-hand side.
This allows the rewrite to proceed correctly, replacing the placeholder with the desired value.
Applying symmetry to rewrite the equality
I substitute the zero word into the comparison, leveraging the property that and-ing with zero yields zero
This transforms the goal into a reflexive equality, which is trivially true
The reasoning hinges on structural equivalence and the invariance of zero under bitwise operations
Establishing equivalence through structural matching and rewriting.
I am verifying that the bitwise AND operation with zero preserves the zero value by leveraging a foundational lemma about word operations.
By applying congruence, I lift the equality from the underlying word level to the U32 type, ensuring consistency across representations.
This confirms the desired property holds uniformly across all values.
Establishing the logical chain for the Sierpinski triangle's first column property.
I am reasoning through the equality of bitwise operations and their implications on boolean outcomes.
By leveraging known identities about zero values in bit manipulation, I infer that certain expressions reduce to trivial truths.
This reduction enables a seamless substitution that validates the desired property through computation and congruence.
Establish the equality through substitution and computation.
I recognize that applying a congruence rule allows me to replace one side of an equality with another equivalent expression based on a proven identity.
The resulting intermediate equality can then be linked to a known true statement via computational reduction.
Transitivity completes the chain, yielding the desired conclusion.
Exploring the reduction path of a complex equality check involving nested structural comparisons.
I am assessing whether the system will fully evaluate deep recursive reductions or risk getting stuck.
To ensure reliability, I am shifting toward simpler, shallow ground-term laws that are guaranteed to reduce.
This approach prioritizes predictability and avoids potential performance pitfalls in deep recursion.
I am selecting foundational laws to establish a reliable basis for reasoning.
I focus on simple, computationally verifiable properties that reflect core behaviors of the system.
I ensure each law is grounded in clear definitions and avoids reliance on opaque components.
I remain mindful of structural constraints like termination and resource usage throughout.
Thinking completed
I'll analyze the task carefully.
What I understand the task to be
Create three files:
playground.bend - prints ASCII Mandelbrot set and ASCII Sierpinski triangle to stdout
LAWS.bend - laws over playground.bend
PROOF.bend - proves every law in LAWS.bend
bend PROOF.bend must print "All terms check." and bend playground.bend must render.
Strategy
Mandelbrot set: For each pixel (row, col), iterate z = zý + c up to a max iteration count. If |z|ý > 4, escape. Output a character based on escape iteration or '#' if it didn't escape.
Sierpinski triangle: Use the rule that a point (row, col) is filled if (col AND row) == col (bitwise), which generates the Sierpinski pattern.
Parallelism: The guide says a ! call ships work to the GPU. For the Mandelbrot, I can fork over rows using parallel lets. However, the guide warns that the fork tree shape matters. For a simple ASCII render, I'll use a fork tree over rows (each row computed independently), then join. But actually, since this is IO-based (printing strings), and the guide says "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner", I need to be careful.
Actually, re-reading: the program must print to stdout. The parallelism exercise is about computing the image, not the printing. So I'll compute rows in parallel (using ! or parallel lets), assemble a String, then print it.
Wait - but IO.print takes a String. And building a String from parallel computations... Let me think about what's actually feasible.
The simplest approach: compute each row as a String using parallel lets, then concatenate and print. But String is Data, so it can be shared.
Actually, for the fork tree exercise: I'll compute the Mandelbrot rows using a recursive fork (parallel let at each level), producing a list of row strings, then join them. The guide says "one fork tree that ends in flat loops" is ideal for shaders, but for this simple case, a binary fork tree over rows (splitting the row range in half recursively) gives a balanced fork tree of depth log2(rows).
Laws I can prove: I need laws that are actually provable within Bend's system. Good candidates:
A helper function's correctness on specific inputs (e.g., "escape iteration for c=0 is max_iter" since 0 never escapes)
Properties of the Sierpinski predicate (e.g., (0 AND row) == 0 means col=0 is always filled)
String length properties of generated rows
Simple arithmetic properties used in the computation
I'll choose laws that reduce to case analysis or simple induction.
Open Questions
IO and parallelism interaction: Can I use ! (bang) inside a do IO block? The guide says "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner" and recommends "Bang in a pure def that returns the pair." So I'll compute the image in a pure def, then print in IO.
String construction from parallel results: If I fork to compute rows in parallel, each producing a String, I need to concatenate them. String.append exists in Base. But can I use parallel lets to build strings? I believe so since String is Data.
Termination: Bend requires structural recursion. For the Mandelbrot iteration, I'll use a Nat fuel counter (max iterations). For row/col iteration, I'll count down Nat values.
What counts as "exercising parallelism"? I'll use parallel lets (a b = f(x) g(y)) to fork the computation, and possibly a ! bang. The fork tree shape will be a balanced binary tree over the row dimension.
Law complexity: I want laws I can definitely prove. Proving properties about the full Mandelbrot output string would be extremely hard. Instead, I'll prove properties of the core helper functions (escape detection, Sierpinski predicate) on small/specific inputs, plus maybe a length property.
match on computed values: The guide says "A match inspects a parameter or a variable bound by a pattern, never a computed value." So if I need to branch on a computed Bool, I must pass it to a helper def. I'll need several such helpers.
Character output: I'll use Char and build String via SCon. For the Mandelbrot, I'll map iteration counts to characters. For simplicity, maybe just # (in set) and . (escaped), or a gradient.
Can I use U32 arithmetic freely in the Mandelbrot computation? F32 operations are laws (built-in), so F32.add, F32.mul etc. are available. But proving things about F32 is impossible (they're axioms). So my laws should be about Nat/U32 logic, not F32.
Revised law strategy: I'll make the Sierpinski triangle use a pure Nat/U32 predicate, and prove laws about that predicate. For the Mandelbrot, I'll prove a property about the iteration bound (e.g., "the iteration function with fuel 0 returns 0" or "c=(0,0) never escapes within any finite bound"). Actually, proving things about the Mandelbrot iteration requires reasoning about F32 which are opaque laws. Better to focus laws on:
The Sierpinski predicate (pure U32 bitwise logic)
String/list length properties of the row generation
Simple properties of helper functions
Let me refine: I'll make the Sierpinski use (col .&. row) == col (bitwise AND). Laws:
sierpinski_filled(0, row) is always True (col=0 is always filled since 0 AND anything = 0)
sierpinski_filled(col, 0) is True iff col == 0
Maybe: the predicate is symmetric in some sense
For Mandelbrot, I'll separate the "iteration count" logic from F32. Actually, I can use a simplified integer Mandelbrot or just prove that the iteration counter with 0 fuel returns 0.
I think the safest laws are about the Sierpinski predicate and about structural properties (string lengths, list lengths).
Ready to proceed. Should I wait for confirmation?
Yes, the task says "Before writing any code, reply with: what you understand the task to be, your strategy, and open questions. No code in that turn. Wait for me."
So I should present this and wait.
Let me structure my response clearly.
What I understand the task to be
Three files in one directory:
playground.bend: Computes and prints an ASCII Mandelbrot set followed by an ASCII Sierpinski triangle to stdout.
LAWS.bend: States formal laws (specifications) about functions in playground.bend.
PROOF.bend: Imports LAWS.bend and provides proofs (defs of the same name) that discharge every law. bend PROOF.bend must print "All terms check."
Strategy
Rendering
Mandelbrot: For each (row, col) in a grid, map to a complex coordinate c, iterate z = zý + c using F32 arithmetic with a Nat fuel bound, and pick a character based on whether/how quickly it escapes. Build each row as a String, concatenate rows with newlines, print.
Sierpinski triangle: Use the bitwise predicate: position (row, col) is filled iff (col .&. row) == col (U32 bitwise AND). This is the classic Sierpinski via Pascal's triangle mod 2. Build rows as Strings, print.
Parallelism / Fork tree shape
I'll compute rows using a balanced binary fork tree: a recursive def that splits the row range in half via a parallel let (a b = compute_rows(lo, mid) compute_rows(mid, hi)), bottoming out at single rows computed in flat loops. This gives a tree of depth log2(num_rows) with num_rows leaves. I'll use ! (bang) on the top-level call to ship it to the GPU.
Why this shape: The guide says "one fork tree that ends in flat loops" is the fast pattern. Each leaf computes one row (a flat loop over columns). The tree is balanced so no lane finishes early. For a 32-row image, that's 5 fork levels and 32 leaves.
However, I must respect the guide's warning: "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner." So I'll compute the image in a pure def that returns the String, and only enter do IO to print it.
Laws I'll choose (and why)
I'll focus on laws I can provably discharge by case analysis and structural induction:
Sierpinski predicate laws (pure U32 bitwise logic, no F32):
col = 0 is always filled (since 0 AND row = 0).
row = 0 fills only col = 0.
The predicate is decidable (returns Bool for all inputs) - trivially true by construction but I can state it as a correctness property on specific values.
Structural / length laws:
A row of width W has length W (proved by induction on the fuel/counter).
The full image string has a computable length (rows x (width + 1) for newlines).
Mandelbrot iteration bound:
With fuel 0, the iteration count is 0 (base case, trivial reflexivity).
The origin c=(0,0) never escapes: z stays 0 forever. But this requires reasoning about F32 which are opaque laws... so I'll instead prove it about the fuel counter: "iteration with fuel N returns at most N." Actually this is also hard without F32 reasoning.
Revised: I'll make the Mandelbrot iteration return a Nat (the count), and prove that mandelbrot_iterations(0n, ...) = 0n (trivial base case). For deeper properties, F32 opacity blocks me. So I'll keep Mandelbrot laws minimal and focus proof effort on Sierpinski and string construction.
Why these laws
Sierpinski uses only U32 bitwise ops and Bool, which are fully defined in Base (not opaque laws). I can do case analysis and induction.
String length is structural induction on the recursive builder.
F32 operations are law declarations (axioms), so I cannot prove anything about their values. Any law requiring F32 reasoning is undischargable.
Open Questions
Parallel let returning Strings: I plan a b = build_rows(lo, mid) build_rows(mid, hi) where each returns a String, then String.append(a, b). Is there any affinity issue? String is Data so should be fine, but I want to confirm the parallel let pattern works with String results.
! on a pure def called from do IO: I'll write:

1234
where build_entire_image internally uses !. Is calling a banged pure def from a do block safe? The guide says to bang in a pure def that returns the pair, and I'm doing that (the pure def computes and returns a String). But the ! is inside the pure def, not at the call site from IO. Actually, I think I need build_entire_image!() at the call site? No - the guide says pow2!(20n) marks the call as GPU. So I'd write String = build_entire_image!(). But inside a do block... Let me re-read: "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner." The workaround is "Bang in a pure def that returns the pair." So maybe I should have the ! inside a pure def, not at the IO call site. Or perhaps: compute the string in a top-level pure def that uses ! internally, and main just calls it without !? Actually no - ! is a call-site annotation. Let me think again...
The guide's Turn.go example does the bang inside a do block but returns a pair. The warning is about ownership. For my case, since I'm just computing a String (Data, copyable), ownership shouldn't be an issue. I'll try image : String = compute_mandelbrot_string!() inside the do block.
match on computed values: I need to branch on Bool results of comparisons (e.g., U32.is_lt(col, width)). Since I can't match on a computed value, I'll need helper defs that take the Bool as a parameter. This will make the code less "flat and procedural" but the guide explicitly says to write the helper and note which rule forced it.
Termination for Mandelbrot iteration: I'll use a Nat fuel parameter that decreases each iteration. The recursive call passes 1n+p  p, which is structurally smaller. This should satisfy the termination checker.
String building: I'll build strings by consing characters (SCon{chr, tail}). For efficiency and to match "flat and procedural," I'll build each row by a tail-recursive accumulator-style def. But termination requires the recursive arg to shrink - I'll count down a Nat.
Can I use U32 arithmetic operators? The guide shows (3 * r * r : U32) as sugar for U32.mul. I'll use this sugar for readability.
The Sierpinski bitwise AND: The guide shows U32.and(a, b) in Base. I'll use (col .&. row : U32) sugar or call U32.and directly.
I'm ready to proceed once you confirm. Should I adjust anything?
You decide all.
Proceeding with the full implementation.
I am carefully evaluating potential pitfalls in the design to ensure robustness and correctness.
Anticipating edge cases and structural vulnerabilities to prevent failures during execution.
Refining the approach to maintain elegance, efficiency, and reliability throughout.
I am constrained by the formal verification system's limitations on floating-point operations and pattern matching.
I cannot verify properties of computations involving floating-point numbers because they lack provable laws.
I must restrict logical reasoning to integer, boolean, or string operations that support formal proofs.
I avoid branching on computed values, adhering strictly to the rule that matches only inspect direct parameters or bound variables.
Constructing a solution with careful attention to structural integrity and termination guarantees.
I am ensuring that all recursive processes rely on naturally decreasing parameters, using numeric counters to enforce progress.
Each component is designed to maintain purity and independence, allowing for safe parallel evaluation.
The final output emerges from a disciplined interplay of constraints, yielding a coherent and correct result.
Computing the image with GPU execution while preserving ownership integrity
I am ensuring that GPU-accelerated computation occurs in a pure definition, avoiding any side effects within continuations to maintain correct resource management.
String concatenation is handled through standard operations, seamlessly joining row components into cohesive output.
Proofs are structured around named laws, each verified by corresponding definitions, and the final outcome reflects complete validation or immediate error if any step remains unproven.
Designing a computational representation of the Mandelbrot set with careful attention to type constraints and resource usage.
I am mapping pixel coordinates to complex plane values while respecting affine semantics and avoiding redundant data references.
Monadic sequencing is used to structure computations without relying on conditional branching, ensuring correctness under strict evaluation rules.
All arithmetic operations are grounded in precise type annotations to maintain consistency across numeric domains.
Computing escape depth for the Mandelbrot set using iterative refinement.
I am evaluating complex dynamics through successive approximations, tracking divergence via magnitude thresholds.
Each step involves transforming coordinates while conserving precision and control flow.
The process unfolds recursively, balancing computational constraints with geometric insight.
Processing the iterative logic for rendering fractal patterns through structured computation
I am evaluating how arithmetic operations on complex types are resolved via method dispatch, ensuring each operation maps correctly to its corresponding method.
I am determining the character representation based on whether a point belongs to the set or escapes, using conditional selection between space and symbol.
I am calculating the column position dynamically by decrementing from the total width, integrating this into a recursive row construction that builds the output string step by step.
Refining the approach to avoid reliance on floating-point operations for coordinate mapping.
Exploring ways to simplify the computation while preserving visual accuracy.
Considering precomputed values or alternative mappings to maintain clarity and efficiency.
Prioritizing a clean, elegant solution that aligns with the expressive goals of the rendering.
Exploring the properties of bitwise operations to generate fractal patterns
I am verifying the mathematical foundation of the Sierpinski triangle using submask logic, confirming that each cell is filled when the column index is a submask of the row index
The pattern holds across multiple rows, with clear visual consistency emerging from the binary structure
This approach reveals how simple computational rules can produce complex geometric forms
Constructing a fractal pattern through recursive binary decomposition.
I am leveraging bitwise logic to determine inclusion in the Sierpinski triangle structure.
The rendering process unfolds hierarchically, splitting work across rows with exponential precision.
Each level of recursion partitions the task into two independent halves, enabling parallel execution.
Rendering the visual elements with clarity and precision
I am considering the structural layout of the output, ensuring that each component is rendered with appropriate dimensions and depth.
The choice of parameters reflects a balance between visual detail and computational efficiency, aligning with the inherent patterns of the fractals.
I am focusing on maintaining clean, readable code while preserving correctness and aesthetic coherence.
Constructing a visual representation of the Sierpinski triangle using binary submask logic
I am aligning each row to a fixed width of 32 cells, ensuring consistent formatting across all levels of recursion
Each position in the grid is determined by whether its column index is a submask of the row index, which naturally confines filled cells to valid ranges within each row
This approach preserves the fractal structure while simplifying visualization through uniform dimensions
Proving properties of the Sierpinski triangle using structural and computational reasoning.
I am analyzing the logical structure of bit operations to establish foundational truths about fill patterns.
Induction on word representation is essential to confirm that bitwise AND with zero yields zero universally.
This ensures the first column remains consistently filled across all rows.
Establishing the base case for the Sierpinski triangle's first column being always filled involves verifying that a bitwise AND with zero yields zero.
This relies on fundamental properties of word operations, where any value combined with zero through AND remains zero.
By unfolding the definitions of comparison and equality in the context of bit representations, the result reduces to a trivial identity.
The reasoning chains these equalities seamlessly, confirming the expected outcome through structural consistency.
Exploring foundational truths through concrete examples
I am testing the validity of basic assertions by reducing them to trivial, observable truths.
Each case is verified directly through equality, avoiding complex reasoning.
This approach builds confidence in the system's behavior before introducing more abstract laws.
Exploring the structure of word operations to establish foundational properties.
I am analyzing how bitwise conjunction with zero behaves across all word lengths and bit patterns.
Through case analysis on both length and bit composition, I trace the inductive step where smaller instances validate larger ones.
The pattern reveals that zero annihilates any word under conjunction, confirming the identity through structural recursion.
Verifying the equality through inductive reasoning
I am confirming that the expression simplifies correctly by leveraging the inductive hypothesis.
The structure of the word operations aligns with the expected outcome, ensuring consistency across cases.
Each transformation preserves equivalence, validating the final result.
Rewriting the equality to match the desired form
I am transforming the expression by leveraging symmetry of equality to reverse the direction of substitution.
This allows me to replace the complex term with a simpler equivalent one, maintaining logical consistency.
The goal is to align the structure so that the constant zero can stand in for the more intricate bitwise operation.
Verifying the equivalence of two word expressions through structural and logical reduction.
I am confirming that the Boolean conjunctions simplify correctly according to their definition.
I am tracing the recursive construction of zero words to ensure their form matches the expected pattern.
I am checking that the word conjunction operation preserves structure by reducing each component step by step.
Exploring the structural properties of bit-level operations and their implications on type-specific behaviors.
Investigating how foundational laws for primitive types like U32 can be established through pattern matching and recursive definitions.
Considering a balanced set of laws that includes both abstract, general principles and concrete, ground-term examples.
Ensuring each law is grounded in computational semantics while maintaining clarity and consistency across abstractions.
Refining the foundational truths of the system
I am carefully selecting a minimal yet sufficient set of provable properties that capture essential behaviors.
Each law is grounded in trivial, verifiable facts about structure and mapping.
The focus remains on clarity, correctness, and logical independence.
Verifying the correctness of the logical law concerning bitwise AND with zero.
I am meticulously examining the base case where the word length is zero, confirming that both operands reduce to the empty word.
I ensure that the structure of the word type and its constructors align with the expected behavior under the given operations.
The equality holds trivially due to the unique nature of the empty word in this context.
Proceeding with the logical analysis of the zero-length case
In the case where the length is zero, the word is inherently empty regardless of its bits.
The operations involved reduce to comparing two empty words, which are trivially equal.
This equality holds by definition and requires no further reasoning.
Verifying the equivalence of expressions under specific type constraints.
I am confirming that both sides reduce to the same canonical form given the zero-length word case.
The symmetry of equality applies correctly despite the erased type parameters.
The proof holds due to structural identity and consistent reduction behavior.
Reconstructing the equality proof by symmetry and substitution
I am applying symmetry to reverse the equality direction, leveraging a known identity that an operation with zero yields zero.
Then I substitute the equivalent expression within a structured type context, ensuring consistency across nested components.
The final result confirms reflexivity through precise structural alignment.
Considering the type and reduction behavior of Word(0n) in pattern matching.
I am evaluating whether explicit matching on bits is necessary when length is 0n, recognizing that Word(0n) reduces to WNil{} regardless of bits.
The equality holds trivially since both sides reduce to the same canonical form.
I conclude that no additional case analysis on bits is required for correctness or type safety.
Organizing the logical structure of the project according to established conventions.
I am aligning the codebase by separating concerns: the implementation resides in a dedicated module, while formal properties are declared in a distinct layer.
Each law is articulated as an open claim, preserved intact for verification.
The proof layer then systematically validates each assertion, ensuring correctness through structured reasoning.
Verifying the consistency of each foundational principle through a corresponding proof.
Each law is matched by a definition bearing its name, ensuring alignment between assertion and demonstration.
The system checks that every proof successfully establishes its corresponding law.
Only when all proofs are validated does it confirm coherence across the entire structure.
Structure the modules to ensure logical dependency and access control.
I am organizing the codebase so that laws are declared in a dedicated file, isolated from implementation details.
Proofs then reference these laws through explicit imports, maintaining clarity and correctness.
This design enforces a clean separation between assertions and their verification, enabling safe and traceable reasoning.
Considering module imports and naming conventions for clarity and accessibility
I am evaluating whether to use a module alias to simplify access to functions from another file
The decision hinges on balancing readability against the verbosity of fully qualified names
Ultimately, I lean toward using an alias to maintain clean, expressive references while adhering to established patterns
Refining the naming strategy to enhance clarity and accessibility.
I am considering how function names and module references interact across different files.
Simplifying the structure by opting for flatter, more direct identifiers avoids unnecessary complexity.
This approach ensures consistent and straightforward reference throughout the proof and law definitions.
Constructing a precise geometric predicate based on bitwise logic.
I am leveraging intrinsic properties of binary representation to define filled cells in a fractal pattern.
The design prioritizes provable correctness through direct bit manipulation rather than recursive decomposition.
Each choice reflects a balance between mathematical elegance and formal verifiability.
Rendering a row of the Sierpinski triangle by recursively processing each cell based on its fill status.
Each cell's state is determined by a recursive predicate that checks whether it should be filled according to the triangle's fractal pattern.
The recursion proceeds by decrementing a structural counter, ensuring termination while tracking position through an auxiliary index.
The result is built as a string of characters, with spaces for empty cells and asterisks for filled ones, culminating in a newline.
Rendering a fractal pattern through recursive parallel computation
I am constructing a geometric visualization by dividing the work into balanced subtrees, ensuring each branch carries equal computational load.
At each level, the problem splits evenly, maintaining symmetry and efficiency until reaching base cases where individual rows are rendered directly.
This approach aligns with a natural hierarchy found in both mathematical structures and optimal execution patterns.
Computing the escape iteration count for a point in the Mandelbrot set using floating-point arithmetic and fuel-based recursion.
I am determining whether the point escapes beyond the radius of two by iteratively squaring and adding complex components.
The recursion terminates when either the maximum depth is reached or the magnitude exceeds four, signaling escape.
Based on this result, I decide whether to render a space or a hash symbol to represent membership in the set.
Computing the escape depth for a complex coordinate in the Mandelbrot set.
I evaluate whether the point escapes under iteration by tracking its magnitude and recursion depth.
For each pixel, I map its position to a complex plane coordinate and simulate the iterative function.
The process continues until either the point escapes or the maximum iterations are reached.
Refactor the repeated computation to enhance efficiency and clarity.
I recognize that recalculating the escape depth twice introduces redundancy and potential inconsistency.
By computing it once and reusing the result, I ensure both accuracy and performance.
This approach also simplifies the logic and aligns with clean functional design principles.
Rendering the Mandelbrot set row by row with recursive traversal
I am structuring the computation to process each pixel in a row, calculating its position in the complex plane and determining its escape behavior through iterative mapping.
The depth of escape is computed once per pixel and passed along to ensure consistent rendering without redundant calculations.
This approach maintains precision while enabling efficient, incremental construction of the output string.
Evaluating the logical structure of the function call and its implications.
The match operation occurs within the target function on a passed parameter, which is valid regardless of how the value was computed.
The concern about matching computed values directly does not apply here since the computation happens before the function call.
Affinity considerations remain relevant but are separate from the current structural validity.
Refining the approach to simplify the Mandelbrot rendering logic
I am focusing on reducing complexity by eliminating redundant computations and streamlining dependencies.
By centering the logic around depth and its relationship to a maximum threshold, I aim to create a cleaner, more maintainable character mapping.
This shift allows me to avoid repeated conversions and unnecessary parameter annotations while preserving correctness.
Rendering the Mandelbrot set with clarity and precision
I am focusing on simplifying the visualization logic by using only two characters: a space for points within the set and a hash for those that escape.
The decision hinges on whether the iteration count reaches the maximum limit, which determines membership in the set.
This approach streamlines both the rendering process and the resulting output's readability.
Refining the logic to ensure consistent and correct handling of depth and maximum depth values across functions.
Each instance where these values are used must be explicitly marked as inputs to maintain clarity and correctness.
This ensures that the conditional checks and character selection process remain reliable and predictable.
The structure now reflects a precise, self-contained evaluation of whether a point belongs to the Mandelbrot set.
Refining the logic to eliminate unused parameters for cleaner, more efficient code.
I am evaluating whether certain variables are truly necessary by tracing their usage in the function body.
Since they aren't referenced, removing them aligns with principles of minimalism and correctness.
The revised approach focuses solely on essential data, ensuring clarity and adherence to structural integrity.
Rendering fractal patterns with recursive decomposition
I am evaluating the structure of a recursive rendering system that divides work into manageable segments based on depth levels.
Each level splits the task into upper and lower halves, ensuring precise alignment with the geometric scaling of the fractals.
The final output combines two distinct visualizations-Mandelbrot and Sierpinski-each rendered at appropriate resolutions for clarity and aesthetic impact.
Verifying the correctness of the expression evaluation and operator semantics.
The power function correctly computes exponential values using recursive definition with natural number exponents.
String concatenation via the append operator is properly resolved as syntactic sugar for the underlying function.
Introducing parallel execution markers enhances concurrency awareness, aligning with the intended computational model.
Reevaluating the warning in context
I am carefully analyzing the relationship between pure function definitions and their invocation within effectful blocks, particularly focusing on how bangs influence ownership semantics.
The warning suggests that placing a bang inside a pure definition is appropriate when returning a pair, which aligns with my current structure.
Since the bang resides within the pure function rather than directly in the do block, the pattern appears correct and safe.
Evaluating the design for GPU execution with proper annotations and type consistency.
I am confirming that all operations align with the expected type laws and runtime behaviors.
The use of call-site markers is appropriate for targeting GPU execution across parallel branches.
All literals, conversions, and arithmetic operations are valid within the language's constraints.
Tracing the data flow through recursive calls and function applications.
I am carefully analyzing which values are reused across recursive steps and must be annotated to preserve their state.
Each parameter that persists through multiple recursive invocations requires explicit tracking to ensure correctness.
The pattern reveals that certain inputs must carry annotations to maintain their integrity throughout the computation.
Analyzing the recursive structure and parameter usage in the function.
Each parameter is passed once to the step function, but some are referenced multiple times within its body.
The depth parameter is used to determine termination condition through equality comparison.
The logic relies on incremental updates and conditional branching based on iteration state.
Evaluating the usage patterns of variables within the recursive structure.
Each parameter's occurrence is scrutinized to determine necessity for explicit passing.
Variables appearing only once in the call do not require special handling, while those used multiple times must be tracked.
The focus remains on maintaining correctness and efficiency through precise variable management.
Evaluating resource usage across function calls and pattern matches
I am assessing how each variable is consumed, particularly focusing on the number of times they appear in expressions and recursive contexts
The key insight is that variables used in multiple distinct contexts-especially those involved in both conditionals and recursive calls-require special attention for borrowing rules
This includes verifying whether data types allow multiple uses through copying or marking them as mutable when necessary
Refining the recursive rendering logic for the Sierpinski triangle
I am simplifying the function by eliminating unnecessary parameters and ensuring consistent use of the row index across recursive calls.
I recognize that the width can be derived from the remaining columns, so it no longer needs to be passed explicitly.
This streamlines the logic while preserving correctness and efficiency.
Analyzing the structural and semantic dependencies in recursive parallel computation.
Recognizing that shared variables across parallel branches must be copyable to ensure safe evaluation.
Inferring that marking parameters with a copyable type annotation enables their reuse in multiple contexts.
Drawing parallels from established patterns to validate the correctness of the design approach.
Thinking completed
I've reviewed the materials carefully. Let me now do the adversarial pass over my own plan, then write the files.
Adversarial Pass
What could go wrong:
F32 opacity kills Mandelbrot proofs. F32.add/mul/etc are all law declarations. I cannot prove anything about the Mandelbrot iteration. Laws must target the Sierpinski predicate (U32 bitwise ops, fully defined) and character/branch-selection helpers (Bool matches, trivially reducible).
Match on computed values. U32.is_eq(...), F32.is_gt(...) etc. produce Bools I need to branch on. The guide forbids match computed:. Every branch needs a helper def that receives the Bool as a parameter. This forces many small defs.
Termination checker and U32. U32 has no structural pattern matching like Nat. All loops must recurse on a Nat fuel/counter that decreases via match n: case 0n: ... case 1n+p:. U32 values can only change via U32.add, U32.inc, etc.
String building via SCon. Building a row character-by-character via SCon{chr, tail} where tail is a recursive call - the recursion must be on a Nat fuel. Fine.
Parallel let inside a pure def returning String. The guide's shader example uses parallel lets in pure defs returning Data. String is Data. Should work. But the guide warns about bangs inside do continuations. I'll keep the bang in the pure def, not in the do block.
The Word.and_with_zero induction proof. I traced through the logic above. The key risk: whether the checker reduces Bool.and(False{}, False{}) to False{} and Bool.and(True{}, False{}) to False{} inside the proof context. Since Bool.and matches on its first argument and both cases produce False{}, this should reduce. But if the checker doesn't fully reduce inside a rewrite target, the proof fails. I'll include it but rank it as a risk.
Nat.pow2 helper for the fork tree offset. I need 2^level as U32 for the row offset in the parallel Sierpinski render. I'll define it recursively on Nat.
File imports. LAWS.bend imports playground.bend. PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend. The guide says "bend refuses a PROOF.bend that sits beside a LAWS.bend without importing it." So PROOF.bend must import ./LAWS.bend.
Operator sugar. (a + b : U32) is sugar for U32.add(a, b). Operators need spaces on both sides.
The ++ operator for String. Sugar for String.append. Works anywhere.
Affine usage. String is Data, so + not needed for multiple uses. But if I pass a String to two places, I need +. In practice, each String is used once (concatenated then printed).
match n: where n is Nat with case 0n: and case 1n+p: - this is the standard pattern. Good.
Proof file naming. Laws in LAWS.bend are proven in PROOF.bend as def LAWS.law_name(...) since the import alias would be used. Actually, looking at the guide: "a law left open in one file may be filled in another as def M.name(..)". So if I import ./LAWS.bend as Laws, proofs are def Laws.name. But actually the guide says "PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and proves each law with a def of the same name (law sorted is proven by def Laws.sorted)". So the alias matters. Let me use import ./LAWS.bend as Laws and then def Laws.law_name(...).
Wait, actually re-reading: "bend refuses a PROOF.bend that sits beside a LAWS.bend without importing it." So PROOF.bend must import LAWS.bend. And the proof def must match the law name. If the law is law sierpinski_apex_is_filled: in LAWS.bend, and PROOF.bend does import ./LAWS.bend as Laws, then the proof is def Laws.sierpinski_apex_is_filled(row):.
Hmm, but actually I think the convention might be that you just import ./LAWS.bend and then define def LAWS.law_name. Let me look at the guide example more carefully:
"By convention, a project keeps its laws in two files at its root. LAWS.bend imports the code and states the laws... PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and proves each law with a def of the same name (law sorted is proven by def Laws.sorted)"
So it's def Laws.sorted where Laws is the import alias. I'll use import ./LAWS.bend as Laws.
What about the where clause in laws? I don't think I need it for my simple laws.
Can I prove U32.and(x, 0) == 0 by induction? Let me trace more carefully. U32.and matches on both args: case U32{x} U32{y}: U32{Word.and(32n, x, y)}. And 0 as U32 is U32{Word.zero(32n)}. So U32.and(row, 0) becomes U32{Word.and(32n, row_bits, Word.zero(32n))}. I need to show this equals 0 = U32{Word.zero(32n)}. So I need Word.and(32n, row_bits, Word.zero(32n)) == Word.zero(32n).
For the Word.and proof by induction on the Word structure... but Word is indexed by Nat. I match on the Nat index. At 0n, Word(0n) = Word.Nil, and the only value is WNil{}. At 1n+p, Word(1n+p) = Word.Con<p>, values are WCon{b, t}.
Actually, I realize there might be an issue: Word.and matches on n first, then on a b. In the proof, I match on n, then on bits. Let me make sure the match structure aligns.

1234567891011121314151617181920
OK this is what I had before. Let me just be very careful with the rewrite syntax.
Actually, wait. Let me reconsider whether I should include this inductive proof at all. It's risky. The simpler approach: just use ground-term laws that reduce by computation. No induction needed.
Ground-term laws:
Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) == True{} - reduces: U32.and(0,0)=0, U32.is_eq(0,0)=True{}
Sierpinski.is_filled(1, 1) == True{} - reduces: U32.and(1,1)=1, U32.is_eq(1,1)=True{}
Sierpinski.is_filled(2, 1) == False{} - reduces: U32.and(2,1)=0, U32.is_eq(0,1)=False{}
Sierpinski.is_filled(3, 3) == True{} - U32.and(3,3)=3, eq=True{}
Sierpinski.is_filled(3, 1) == True{} - U32.and(3,1)=1, eq(1,1)=True{}
Sierpinski.is_filled(3, 2) == True{} - U32.and(3,2)=2, eq(2,2)=True{}
These all reduce by computation. Safe.
For character selection:
Sierpinski.character_for_cell(True{}) == Chr{42} - reduces
Sierpinski.character_for_cell(False{}) == Chr{32} - reduces
For the Mandelbrot branch selector:
Mandelbrot.select_character(True{}) == Chr{32} - in-set = space
Mandelbrot.select_character(False{}) == Chr{35} - escaped = '#'
These are trivially provable with {==}.
I'll also try one slightly more interesting law: the Sierpinski predicate at (0, col) for any col. Since U32.and(0, x) = 0 for all x, and U32.is_eq(0, col) is True only when col=0. So Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) == True{} and Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 5) == False{} are both ground terms.
Let me also think about whether I can prove something about the row builder. For a row of width 1, the Sierpinski row builder produces a specific string. But this requires the recursion to fully reduce, which it should for small Nat values.
Actually, let me try: Sierpinski.render_one_row(0, 3) should produce "***\n" (since row 0 has all positions filled: 0&0=0, 0&1=0 wait no. is_filled(0, col) = U32.and(0, col) == col, which is 0 == col. So only col=0 is filled. So row 0 of width 3 is "* \n".
Hmm wait, let me reconsider the Sierpinski predicate. The standard Sierpinski triangle has row n, position k filled iff C(n,k) is odd, which by Lucas' theorem is iff k is a submask of n, i.e., (k & n) == k.
So is_filled(row, col) = U32.is_eq(U32.and(col, row), col).
Row 0: col=0: (0&0)==0 û. col=1: (1&0)==1? 0==1? No. col=2: (2&0)==2? 0==2? No.
Row 1: col=0: (0&1)==0 û. col=1: (1&1)==1 û.
Row 2: col=0: (0&2)==0 û. col=1: (1&2)==1? 0==1? No. col=2: (2&2)==2 û.
Row 3: col=0: û. col=1: (1&3)==1 û. col=2: (2&3)==2 û. col=3: (3&3)==3 û.
This gives:

1234
That's the Sierpinski triangle (top-left aligned). Good.
For the ASCII rendering, I'll center it or just left-align. Let me left-align for simplicity.
Now, for the fork tree shape discussion: I'll use a parallel let to split the Sierpinski rendering into upper and lower halves. With 16 rows (depth 4), the fork tree has 4 levels and 16 leaves. Each leaf renders one row via a flat loop over columns.
For the Mandelbrot, I'll also split rows in parallel. The fork tree is the same shape.
Actually, for simplicity and to avoid complex Nat arithmetic for splitting, let me use a fixed structure: compute the top half and bottom half in parallel. This gives a fork tree of depth 1 with 2 leaves for each image. Or I can do a recursive split with a depth parameter.
Let me use the depth parameter approach for the Sierpinski (to show the recursive fork tree) and a simple two-way split for the Mandelbrot.
Actually, the simplest approach that clearly exercises parallelism:

12345678
But I need Nat.to_u32_pow2. Let me define:

1234
This is structural recursion on Nat. Good.
For the Mandelbrot, I'll do the same recursive split over rows.
Now, the Mandelbrot computation uses F32. The iteration:

123456789101112131415161718
Wait, the helper check_escape is forced by the "match only inspects parameters" rule. The escaped Bool is computed from F32.is_gt(...), so I can't match on it directly in iterate. I pass it to check_escape which matches on its parameter.
For the character mapping:

1234
And to determine in_set:

123
Wait, U32.is_eq(depth, U32.from_nat(max_iter)) is a computed value. I need a helper:

12345678
Hmm, but depth and max_depth are unused in pick_character. That's fine - they're just there to make the computed Bool a parameter. Actually, I can simplify: just pass the Bool.

12345678910
This is getting verbose but correct. The comment should say which rule forced the helper.
Now for the row rendering:

123456789
And pixel_char maps (row, col) to the complex plane coordinate and computes the character.
For mapping to the complex plane:
cx ranges from -2.0 to 1.0 (width 3.0)
cy ranges from -1.5 to 1.5 (height 3.0)
cx = -2.0 + 3.0 * col / width
cy = -1.5 + 3.0 * row / height
But F32 division is a law (opaque). I can still call it, just can't prove anything about it.
Actually, for simplicity, let me use a fixed resolution and compute coordinates with F32 arithmetic. The rendering will work; I just can't prove properties about the coordinates.
Let me now think about the overall structure and write the code.
For the parallel fork tree: I'll use depth 4 (16 rows) for Sierpinski and depth 4 (16 rows) for Mandelbrot. Width 32 for Sierpinski, 60 for Mandelbrot.
Actually, let me make the images small enough to render quickly but large enough to be recognizable. Mandelbrot: 60 wide, 30 tall (depth ~5). Sierpinski: 32 wide, 16 tall (depth 4).
Wait, for the parallel split with depth d, I get 2^d rows. So depth 4 = 16 rows, depth 5 = 32 rows. Let me use depth 5 for Mandelbrot (32 rows) and depth 4 for Sierpinski (16 rows).
Now let me write the actual code.
One more consideration: the guide says "A def is flat when it has no parallel let, no bang, no closure apply, no non-flat call and no non-tail self call: it compiles to one native tail loop." The row rendering loops are flat (tail-recursive on Nat). The fork tree defs have parallel lets. Good.
Let me also think about what main looks like:

1234
And Playground.render_all() uses ! internally? No - ! is a call-site annotation. I'll write:

123
And in main:

123
Wait, can I bang a call inside a do block? The guide warns: "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner." But it also says the workaround is "Bang in a pure def that returns the pair."
Hmm, but Playground.render_all() returns a String, not a pair. And String is Data. Let me re-read the warning: "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner (the tree is a captured local): 2x reads. Bang in a pure def that returns the pair."
I think the issue is specifically about the fork tree being captured. For a simple String result, it should be fine. But to be safe, let me structure it as:

1234567891011
Actually, I think the simplest safe approach is to not use ! at all in the do block, and instead have the parallelism be purely CPU-side parallel lets (which still exercise parallelism). The ! is for GPU. The task says "exercise parallelism" - parallel lets exercise parallelism on CPU. I'll use ! on the top-level call from main but structure it carefully.
Actually, re-reading the guide: "When compiled to a native executable, pow2(20n) runs in parallel on the CPU, while pow2!(20n) runs on the GPU." And "A machine without a GPU runs ! on the CPU (still in parallel)."
So parallel lets work on CPU without !. The ! just routes to GPU. For this exercise, parallel lets are sufficient to "exercise parallelism." I'll use ! on the top-level render call to also demonstrate GPU routing, but the parallelism is exercised either way.
Let me structure main as:

123
Where Playground.render_all() contains parallel lets internally. The ! on render_all ships the whole computation to GPU. Since String is Data and the result is just a String, ownership shouldn't be an issue.
But wait - the guide says "A bang inside a do continuation flips its callee to owner." If I write Playground.render_all!() inside the do block, that's a bang inside a do continuation. The warning says this causes 2x reads. The workaround is "Bang in a pure def that returns the pair."
So maybe I should do:

123456
Hmm, but that's still calling a banged function from IO. Actually, I think the issue is more nuanced. Let me just avoid ! in the do block and use it in a pure context. Or better: don't use ! at all. The parallel lets already exercise parallelism. The ! is just for GPU routing.
Actually, you know what, let me just use parallel lets without !. The task says "exercise parallelism" and parallel lets do that. I'll mention in comments that ! could be added for GPU routing.
OK, I think I have enough to write the code. Let me do it.
One more thing: the PROOF.bend file. I need to import LAWS.bend and provide defs for each law. The laws are in LAWS.bend which imports playground.bend.
Structure:
playground.bend: import Base, defines all the rendering functions
LAWS.bend: import Base, import ./playground.bend as Playground, states laws
PROOF.bend: import Base, import ./LAWS.bend as Laws, provides proofs
Wait, but the laws reference functions from playground.bend. If LAWS.bend imports playground.bend, the laws can reference those functions. Then PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and provides proofs.
But actually, for the proofs to reference the playground functions (to compute), PROOF.bend also needs access to them. Since PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend which imports playground.bend, the names should be available transitively? Or do I need to import playground.bend directly in PROOF.bend?
Looking at the guide: "a law left open in one file may be filled in another as def M.name(..)". So if the law is law foo: in LAWS.bend, the proof is def Laws.foo(...) in PROOF.bend (where Laws is the import alias for LAWS.bend).
But the proof body needs to reference functions from playground.bend. I'll import playground.bend in PROOF.bend too.
Let me finalize the laws I'll prove:
sierpinski_apex_is_filled: Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) == True{}
sierpinski_row_one_both_filled: Two laws or one? Let me do separate:
sierpinski_row_one_left_filled: Sierpinski.is_filled(1, 0) == True{}
sierpinski_row_one_right_filled: Sierpinski.is_filled(1, 1) == True{}
sierpinski_row_two_middle_empty: Sierpinski.is_filled(2, 1) == False{}
sierpinski_row_three_all_filled: Sierpinski.is_filled(3, 1) == True{} (and maybe 3,2)
sierpinski_filled_character: Sierpinski.character_for_cell(True{}) == Chr{42}
sierpinski_empty_character: Sierpinski.character_for_cell(False{}) == Chr{32}
mandelbrot_in_set_character: Mandelbrot.branch_on_depth(True{}) == Chr{32}
mandelbrot_escaped_character: Mandelbrot.branch_on_depth(False{}) == Chr{35}
All of these reduce by computation. Proofs are all {==}.
Actually, let me make the Mandelbrot character function simpler. Instead of branch_on_depth(depth, max_depth, in_set), let me just have:

1234
Then the law is about Mandelbrot.select_character(True{}) and Mandelbrot.select_character(False{}).
OK let me write the code now. I'll be very careful with syntax.
Actually, one more issue: the Sierpinski triangle rendering. For a proper Sierpinski triangle appearance, I want it centered. Row r has r+1 positions (0 to r). But if I'm rendering a fixed-width grid, I need to decide the layout.
Simplest: render a grid of height rows and width columns. Position (row, col) is filled iff U32.and(col, row) == col. This gives a left-aligned Sierpinski triangle.
For a nicer appearance, I could offset each row, but that complicates things. Let me just do left-aligned.
Actually, for the classic Sierpinski triangle look:

12345678
Each row r has 2^r positions. The triangle is centered. But implementing centering requires computing offsets, which is doable but adds complexity.
For simplicity, I'll render it as a left-aligned grid where row r, column c is filled iff (c & r) == c. With 16 rows and 16 columns, this gives:

12345678910111213141516
That's recognizable as Sierpinski. Good enough.
Now let me write the files.
For the Mandelbrot, I need to map pixel coordinates to complex plane coordinates. With width W and height H:
cx = -2.0 + 3.0 * (col / W)  ranges from -2.0 to 1.0
cy = -1.5 + 3.0 * (row / H)  ranges from -1.5 to 1.5
In F32: F32.add(F32.neg(2.0), F32.mul(3.0, F32.div(F32.from_nat(...), F32.from_nat(...)))). But I need to convert U32 col/row to F32. I can use U32.to_f32.
Actually, U32.to_f32 is a law (opaque). I can call it but can't prove anything about it. That's fine for rendering.
Let me write:

12345
These are pure functions using F32 laws. They'll compute at runtime but I can't prove anything about them. That's fine.
OK, I'm going to write the code now. Let me be very precise.
Wait, one more thing about the do block syntax. Looking at the guide:

123
And for binding:

123
For a pure let in a do block: x : A = v.
So my main:

1234
This should work. Playground.render_all() is a pure computation, bound with =.
Now, about the parallel let syntax: a b = f(x) g(y). This is at the statement level. Can I use it inside a def body? Yes, the guide shows it in pow2:

123456
So parallel lets are statements in a def body. Good.
Let me now write everything out carefully.
Actually, I realize I should double-check: can I use (a + b : U32) syntax? The guide says "Inside (.. : T), + - * / % call T.add through T.mod". And "Operators need spaces on both sides." So (a + b : U32) is valid.
For F32: (a + b : F32) calls F32.add(a, b). Good.
One concern: F32.neg(2.0) - is F32.neg available? Looking at Base: yes, law F32.neg: for a: F32, F32. Good.
And the literal 2.0 is F32. (-2.0 : F32) - actually, can I write negative F32 literals? The guide shows 1.5 as an F32 literal. I'll use F32.neg(2.0) to be safe, or just 0.0 - 2.0  (0.0 - 2.0 : F32).
Actually, looking at the syntax reference: "42 1.5 3n 'c' "s"" are literals for U32, F32, Nat, Char, String. No mention of negative literals. I'll use (0.0 - 2.0 : F32) for -2.0.
Let me also think about the String literal "\n". In the syntax, "s" is a String literal. I'll use SCon{Chr{10}, SNil{}} for newline to be explicit, or just "\n" if the language supports escape sequences. The guide doesn't explicitly mention escape sequences in string literals. To be safe, I'll construct the newline character explicitly: SCon{Chr{10}, SNil{}}.
Actually, looking at Base's String.lines: String.split(s, '\n'). So '\n' is a valid Char literal. And by extension, "\n" should be a valid String literal. I'll use "\n".
Hmm, but the guide says ASCII only. \n is ASCII (code 10). Fine.
Let me now write the three files.
Actually wait - I need to double-check one thing about the proof file. The guide says:
"PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and proves each law with a def of the same name (law sorted is proven by def Laws.sorted)"
So if LAWS.bend has law sierpinski_apex_is_filled:, PROOF.bend has def Laws.sierpinski_apex_is_filled: (note: no law keyword, just def).
And the proof def must have the same parameters as the law. If the law is:

12
Then the proof is:

12
Wait, but the law has no for parameters, so the proof def has no parameters. And the body is {==} since both sides reduce to the same thing.
Let me verify: Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) = U32.is_eq(U32.and(0, 0), 0) = Cmp.is_eq(U32.cmp(U32.and(0, 0), 0)).
U32.and(0, 0): matches U32{Word.zero(32n)} and U32{Word.zero(32n)}, calls Word.and(32n, Word.zero(32n), Word.zero(32n)).
Word.and(32n, ...): recurses 32 levels, at each level matching WCon{False{}, ...} and WCon{False{}, ...}, computing Bool.and(False{}, False{}) = False{}, and recursing. Eventually returns Word.zero(32n).
So U32.and(0, 0) reduces to U32{Word.zero(32n)} = 0.
Then U32.is_eq(0, 0) = Cmp.is_eq(U32.cmp(0, 0)). U32.cmp(0, 0) matches both as U32{Word.zero(32n)}, calls Word.cmp(32n, Word.zero(32n), Word.zero(32n)). This recurses 32 levels comparing False{} with False{}, returning EQ{}. Then Cmp.is_eq(EQ{}) = True{}.
So Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) reduces to True{}. And the goal {True{} == True{} : Bool} is proven by {==}.
But will the checker actually perform all 32 levels of reduction? It should, since it's all structural recursion on concrete values. But it might be slow. For the proof to work, the checker needs to fully reduce both sides.
This is a risk. If the checker has a reduction depth limit, it might not fully reduce. But I'll assume it does, since the guide's examples show similar patterns.
For Sierpinski.is_filled(2, 1):
U32.and(2, 1): 2 in binary is 10, 1 is 01. AND = 00 = 0.
U32.is_eq(0, 1): 0 != 1, so False{}.
This should reduce to False{}. The proof is {==}.
OK, I'm confident enough. Let me write the code.
One more thought: for the Mandelbrot rendering to look decent, I need enough iterations and a reasonable grid size. Let me use:
Width: 60 columns
Height: 32 rows (depth 5 for the fork tree)
Max iterations: 50
For Sierpinski:
Width: 32 columns
Height: 16 rows (depth 4)
These should render quickly and look recognizable.
Let me also think about whether the Mandelbrot will actually look right. The standard Mandelbrot set in the region [-2, 1] x [-1.5, 1.5] with 60x32 resolution and 50 iterations should show the main cardioid and some detail. Good.
Now, writing the code. I'll be very careful with:
Spaces around operators
Proper indentation
Correct type annotations
Match syntax
Parallel let syntax
Let me structure playground.bend:

1234567891011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041424344454647484950515253545556
Wait, I need to define U32.pow2. Let me add it to playground.bend:

123456
Hmm, but U32.pow2 might conflict with something in Base. Let me check... Base has U32.pow(+a: U32, n: Nat) which computes a^n. My U32.pow2 computes 2^n. Different name, should be fine.
Actually wait, I should name it something more descriptive per the constraints. "Full descriptive names, no abbreviations." So U32.pow2  maybe U32.power_of_two? But it's a helper. Let me call it Playground.power_of_two_as_u32 or just keep it as a local helper. Actually, the constraint says no abbreviations. pow2 is an abbreviation. Let me use power_of_two.
But wait, it's in the U32 namespace. U32.power_of_two(exponent: Nat) -> U32. That's descriptive enough.
Hmm, but actually the constraint says "Full descriptive names, no abbreviations, no single-letter names, pattern binders included." So pattern binders like p in case 1n+p: need to be descriptive? That seems extreme. Let me re-read: "Full descriptive names, no abbreviations, no single-letter names, pattern binders included."
OK so even pattern binders need full names. So instead of case 1n+p:, I should write case 1n+remaining: or case 1n+predecessor:. And instead of a b = ..., I should use descriptive names.
Let me revise:
case 1n+p:  case 1n+remaining: or case 1n+tail_length: etc.
a b = f(x) g(y)  upper_result lower_result = f(x) g(y)
Variable names like x, y  current_x, current_y etc.
This will make the code verbose but compliant.
Let me also reconsider the F32 Mandelbrot iteration. The variables are:
cx, cy: the complex constant
current_real, current_imag: the current z value
iteration_count: how many iterations so far
fuel: remaining iterations
All need descriptive names.
Let me now write the complete code. This will be long.
Actually, I realize there's another issue. The parallel let syntax: a b = f(x) g(y). The names a and b are bound. If I need descriptive names, I'd write something like:

1
That's fine.
Let me also think about whether I need the + annotation anywhere. String is Data, so if I use a String value twice, I need +. In my code, each String is used once (concatenated), so no + needed. U32 is Data, and I might use row/col values multiple times (e.g., passing them to multiple functions). Let me check...
In Sierpinski.render_one_row, row_index is used in the recursive call and in is_filled. That's two uses. Since U32 is Data, I need +row_index or the checker will complain. Wait, actually in the recursive call, row_index is passed unchanged. And in is_filled, it's also used. So two uses of row_index. I need +row_index: U32 in the parameter.
Hmm, but looking at the guide's examples, they don't always use +. Let me re-read: "Bend, by default, is affine, meaning variables must be used, at most, once. Here, is Data declares that Shape may be copied, while is Type keeps it non-copiable. The + annotation before a variable name allows using it more than once, if the variable is Data-kinded."
So if I use a Data-kinded variable more than once, I need +. U32 is Data. So if row_index is used twice, I need +row_index.
Let me trace through Sierpinski.render_one_row:

1234567
Here, row_index is used in is_filled and in the recursive call. Two uses  needs +.
col_index is used in is_filled and in (col_index + 1 : U32). Two uses  needs +.
cols_remaining is only matched once. No + needed.
Actually wait, (col_index + 1 : U32) uses col_index. And Sierpinski.is_filled(row_index, col_index) uses both. So yes, both need +.
But wait, in the recursive call Sierpinski.render_one_row(row_index, rest, (col_index + 1 : U32)), row_index is passed. And in Sierpinski.is_filled(row_index, col_index), row_index is also passed. That's two uses of row_index. So +row_index is needed.
Similarly, col_index appears in Sierpinski.is_filled(row_index, col_index) and in (col_index + 1 : U32). Two uses  +col_index.
OK, I'll add + where needed.
For the Mandelbrot iteration:

1
cx and cy are used in every recursive call (passed unchanged). current_real and current_imag are used to compute new values and also passed. fuel is matched. iteration_count is used once (in the return or passed to recursive call).
Actually, F32 is Data (it's F32{data: Word(32n)} and Word is Data). So F32 values can be copied with +.
Let me trace more carefully:
cx: used in Mandelbrot.check_escape(cx, ...)  passed to recursive call. One use per iteration, but across iterations it's reused. Actually, in the def body, cx appears in the call to check_escape. That's one use in this function body. But check_escape will pass it to the recursive iterate call. So within iterate, cx is used once. No + needed? Wait, no. Within the body of iterate, cx appears in the call Mandelbrot.check_escape(cx, cy, ...). That's one use. But if I also use it elsewhere... Let me check. In the case 0n: branch, I return iteration_count, so cx is unused (dropped). In the case 1n+remaining: branch, cx is passed to check_escape. One use. So no + needed for cx within iterate.
But wait, in check_escape, cx is passed to the recursive iterate call. So within check_escape, cx is used once. Fine.
Hmm, actually I think the affine checker looks at each def body independently. If cx appears once in the body, it's fine. If it appears twice, I need +.
Let me be more careful. In Mandelbrot.iterate:

1234567
Here, cx appears once (in the check_escape call). cy once. current_real appears in F32.mul(current_real, current_real) - wait, that's TWO uses of current_real! So I need +current_real.
Similarly, current_imag appears twice in F32.mul(current_imag, current_imag). Need +current_imag.
And x_squared is used in F32.add(x_squared, y_squared) and passed to check_escape. Two uses  need +x_squared? But x_squared is a local let binding, not a parameter. Do I need + on let bindings too?
Looking at the guide: "x = v +x = v -x = v # a let: affine, reusable, erased". So yes, I can write +x_squared = F32.mul(...) to make it reusable.
OK this is getting complex. Let me just add + wherever a value is used more than once.
Let me now write the final code. I'll be thorough.
Actually, I want to reconsider the structure. The constraint says "Flat and procedural where the language allows it." So I should minimize helper defs. But the language forces helpers for matching on computed values. I'll add comments explaining which rule forced each helper.
Let me also reconsider: do I really need F32 for the Mandelbrot? Could I use a simpler integer-based approach? The task says "prints an ASCII Mandelbrot set" - it should look like a Mandelbrot set. Using F32 is the natural approach. I'll stick with F32.
OK, writing the code now. Final structure:
playground.bend:
U32.power_of_two helper
Sierpinski: is_filled, character_for_cell, render_one_row, render_rows (parallel fork)
Mandelbrot: pixel_to_real, pixel_to_imag, iterate, check_escape (helper forced by match rule), select_character, character_for_pixel, pick_character (helper forced by match rule), render_one_row, render_row_go, render_rows (parallel fork)
Playground.render_all (parallel let for both images)
main
LAWS.bend:
Import playground.bend
State laws about Sierpinski predicate and character selection
PROOF.bend:
Import LAWS.bend
Prove each law with {==}
Let me write it all out now.
Hmm, one more thought: the constraint says "The program is meant to exercise parallelism. Say what shape your recursion gives the fork tree and why." I need to include this in comments.
The fork tree for Sierpinski with depth 4:
Level 0 (root): one parallel let splits into 2 tasks
Level 1: each of those splits into 2  4 tasks
Level 2: 8 tasks
Level 3: 16 tasks (leaves)
Each leaf renders one row via a flat loop over 32 columns
Total: 16 leaves, 15 internal nodes, depth 4. Balanced binary tree.
For Mandelbrot with depth 5:
32 leaves, depth 5
Each leaf renders one row via a flat loop over 60 columns, each column doing up to 50 F32 iterations
The guide says "A fast shader in Bend is one fork tree that ends in flat loops." This is exactly that pattern. The fork tree is balanced so all lanes finish at roughly the same time. The leaves are flat loops (tail-recursive Nat iteration).
OK, I'm writing the code now. Let me be extremely careful with syntax.
Wait, one more issue: in the parallel let, both calls must be to the same function or at least independent. The guide shows:

1
And in the shader guide:

12
So parallel lets can have 2, 3, 4+ bindings. I'll use 2 for my binary split.
The syntax is: name1 name2 = expr1 expr2 on one line (or wrapped). Let me check if it needs to be on one line. Looking at the guide examples, it seems to be on one line. But for readability with long expressions, I might need to wrap. Let me keep it on one line to be safe.
Actually, looking more carefully at the shader guide:

12
This appears to be wrapped across two lines. So multi-line parallel lets are OK. Good.
Let me write the code.
One final thought: the String.append function (sugar ++) is defined in Base. It's recursive on the first argument. When I do upper_rows ++ lower_rows, this walks upper_rows to append lower_rows. Fine.
And "\n" as a String literal - I'll use it. If it doesn't work, I'll fall back to SCon{Chr{10}, SNil{}}.
OK here we go.
Let me reconsider the Mandelbrot rendering. For each pixel, I need to:
Convert (row, col) to (cx, cy) in the complex plane
Iterate z = zý + c up to max_iter
Check if it escaped
Return a character
The conversion:
cx = -2.0 + 3.0 * col / width
cy = -1.5 + 3.0 * row / height
In Bend with F32:

12
Wait, operator precedence. (a - b + c * d / e : F32) - does this parse as ((a - b) + ((c * d) / e))? In Bend, operators inside (... : T) follow standard precedence? The guide doesn't specify. To be safe, I'll use explicit calls:

12
This is unambiguous.
Similarly for cy:

12
Now the iteration. I need to be careful about the escape check. The standard check is |z|ý > 4, i.e., xý + yý > 4.

12345678910
Wait, current_real is used twice in F32.mul(current_real, current_real). So I need +current_real. And it's also passed to check_escape. That's three uses! So definitely +current_real.
Similarly current_imag is used in F32.mul(current_imag, current_imag) (two uses) and passed to check_escape (third use). Need +current_imag.
And point_real, point_imag are passed to check_escape (one use each in this body). But they'll be used again in the recursive call within check_escape. Within iterate's body, they're used once. No + needed.
Wait, actually in the case 0n: branch, point_real, point_imag, current_real, current_imag are all unused (dropped). That's fine for affine types - dropping is free.
In the case 1n+remaining_fuel: branch:
point_real: used once (passed to check_escape). OK.
point_imag: used once. OK.
current_real: used in F32.mul(current_real, current_real) (2 uses) and passed to check_escape (1 use). Total 3 uses. Need +.
current_imag: same. Need +.
iteration_count: used once (passed to check_escape). OK.
real_squared: used in F32.add(real_squared, imag_squared) and passed to check_escape. 2 uses. Need +real_squared = ....
imag_squared: same. Need +imag_squared = ....
Let me rewrite:

12345678
Hmm wait, point_real and point_imag - in the case 0n branch they're dropped. In the case 1n+remaining_fuel branch they're used once. So within the function, they're used at most once per branch. No + needed. But wait, the affine checker might look at the whole function, not per-branch. Actually, I think it's per-branch: in each branch, each variable is used at most once. The case 0n branch drops them (0 uses), the other branch uses them once. That's fine.
But actually, I realize point_real might need + if it's used in the case 0n branch... no, in case 0n I just return iteration_count. The other variables are dropped. Dropping is free in affine type theory.
OK, I think my analysis is correct. Let me proceed.
For check_escape:

1234567891011
Here, point_real is used in next_real computation and passed to iterate. Two uses  +point_real.
point_imag similarly  +point_imag.
current_real is used in next_imag computation. One use. But wait, it's also... no, just in F32.mul(F32.mul(2.0, current_real), current_imag). One use. OK.
current_imag same. One use.
real_squared used in next_real. One use.
imag_squared used in next_real. One use.
iteration_count used in case True{} (returned) and in case False{} (passed to iterate). But these are different branches, so within each branch it's used once. OK.
Wait, but point_real in case False{}: used in F32.add(F32.sub(real_squared, imag_squared), point_real) AND in Mandelbrot.iterate(point_real, ...). That's two uses in the same branch. Need +point_real.
Similarly point_imag: used in next_imag computation and in iterate call. Two uses. Need +point_imag.
OK let me add + to those.
This is getting very detailed. Let me just write it all out and be careful.
For the character selection:

123456
And to call it:

1234567891011121314151617
Hmm, depth and max_depth are unused in branch_on_set_membership. That's OK - they're just there to make the computed Bool a parameter. But the affine checker might complain about unused variables? Actually, dropping is free in affine type theory. So unused variables are fine (they're dropped).
Wait, but the constraint says "Full descriptive names." Having unused parameters is a bit odd but necessary for the language rule. I'll add a comment explaining why they're there.
Actually, I can simplify: just pass the Bool directly.

1234567
This is cleaner. branch_on_set_membership just takes the Bool and matches on it. The helper exists because the Bool is computed (from U32.is_eq) and can't be matched inline.
OK, I think I have a solid plan. Let me write the final code.
For the row rendering of Mandelbrot:

1234567
Here, row_index is used twice (in character_for_pixel and recursive call). Need +row_index.
image_width used twice. Need +image_width.
image_height used twice. Need +image_height.
max_iterations used twice. Need +max_iterations.
col_index used twice (in character_for_pixel and in col_index + 1). Need +col_index.
And the parallel fork for Mandelbrot rows:

12345678
Many parameters used twice  need + on most of them.
OK, I'll write it all out now. Let me be comprehensive.
Actually, I realize I should double-check: does U32.from_nat exist in Base? Yes: def U32.from_nat(n: Nat) -> U32:. Good.
And Nat to U32 conversion for the width/height parameters. I'll pass width and height as U32 directly (literals like 60, 32 are U32 by default).
Wait, 60 is a U32 literal. 32n is a Nat literal. I need to be careful about types.
For the fork tree depth, I use Nat (for structural recursion). For image dimensions, I use U32 (for arithmetic). For the column/row width in the row renderer, I use Nat (for the loop counter).
Let me finalize the parameters:
Mandelbrot.render_rows(first_row: U32, depth: Nat, row_width: Nat, image_width: U32, image_height: U32, max_iterations: Nat)
Sierpinski.render_rows(first_row: U32, depth: Nat, row_width: Nat)
And the top-level call:

1234
Wait, Mandelbrot.render_rows(0, 5n, 60n, 60, 32, 50n):
first_row: 0 (U32)
depth: 5n (Nat)  32 rows
row_width: 60n (Nat)  60 columns per row
image_width: 60 (U32)  for coordinate mapping
image_height: 32 (U32)  for coordinate mapping
max_iterations: 50n (Nat)  fuel for iteration
And Sierpinski.render_rows(0, 4n, 32n):
first_row: 0 (U32)
depth: 4n (Nat)  16 rows
row_width: 32n (Nat)  32 columns per row
This should work.
Now let me write the actual files. I'll format them carefully.
One more consideration: the import in LAWS.bend and PROOF.bend.
LAWS.bend:

12
Then laws reference Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled etc. Wait, no. The import alias applies to the module. If playground.bend defines Sierpinski.is_filled, then importing as Playground gives Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled.
Hmm, but that's verbose. Let me check: the guide says "import ./math.bend as M # M.x now names every def of math.bend". So if math.bend has def square(...), it becomes M.square(...).
So if playground.bend has def Sierpinski.is_filled(...), importing as Playground gives Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(...).
That's fine for the laws.
PROOF.bend:

123
Then proofs are def Laws.law_name(...).
Actually wait, I need to check: does PROOF.bend need to import playground.bend directly? The proof bodies reference functions from playground.bend (like Sierpinski.is_filled). If LAWS.bend imports playground.bend, does PROOF.bend get access transitively?
I don't think so. Imports are not transitive in most languages. I'll import playground.bend directly in PROOF.bend.
OK, writing the code now. For real this time.
Let me also make sure I handle the String concatenation correctly. upper_rows ++ lower_rows uses String.append. This is defined in Base and works recursively.
And mandelbrot_image ++ "\n" ++ sierpinski_image - this is String.append(String.append(mandelbrot_image, "\n"), sierpinski_image). Should work.
Alright, let me write it all out. I'll aim for correctness over brevity.
Actually, one more thought on the laws. I want to make sure the laws are interesting enough to be meaningful but simple enough to prove. Let me choose:
Sierpinski predicate ground cases (5-6 laws)
Sierpinski character selection (2 laws)
Mandelbrot character selection (2 laws)
Maybe one law about U32.power_of_two: U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1
All provable by {==} since they reduce by computation.
Total: about 10 laws. That's a reasonable number.
Let me finalize and write.
Hmm, actually for U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1: this reduces to 1 == 1 which is trivially true. But is 1 a U32 literal? Yes, bare numbers are U32. So {U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1 : U32} should work.
And U32.power_of_two(1n) == 2: reduces to (2 * U32.power_of_two(0n) : U32) = (2 * 1 : U32) = U32.mul(2, 1) = 2. And the goal is 2 == 2. Works.
OK, writing now.
Let me reconsider one thing: the constraint says "Comments state why: the constraint, the failure prevented, the alternative rejected. Not what the line does."
So every comment should explain WHY, not WHAT. For example:
Instead of "# Compute x squared", write "# F32 multiplication is used here because the escape condition requires |z|^2, and F32 is the only floating-point type in Base; Nat overflow would corrupt the iteration."
Instead of "# Match on escaped", write "# Helper forced by the rule that match inspects only parameters, never computed values; the escape Bool comes from F32.is_gt, so it must arrive as a parameter."
I'll write meaningful why-comments.
Also: "ASCII only." No unicode characters in the source. I'll use Chr{42} for '*', Chr{35} for '#', Chr{32} for ' ', Chr{10} for newline. Or I can use the character literals '*', '#', ' '. The guide shows 'c' as a Char literal. So '*' should work. But to be safe with ASCII, I'll use Chr{42} etc. Actually, '*' is ASCII. I'll use character literals where possible for readability.
Wait, the guide's syntax reference says 'c' is a Char literal. So '*', '#', ' ' are valid. And "\n" should be a valid String literal for newline. Let me use these.
Actually, I'm not 100% sure '\n' works as a Char literal. The guide shows 'c' but doesn't explicitly show escape sequences. To be safe, I'll use Chr{10} for newline. For other characters, I'll use literals like '*', '#', ' '.
OK, truly writing now.
Let me structure the code carefully. I'll write playground.bend first, then LAWS.bend, then PROOF.bend.
For the fork tree comment, I'll explain:
The recursion creates a balanced binary fork tree of depth D
2^D leaves, each rendering one row via a flat tail-recursive loop
The tree is balanced so all parallel tasks finish at roughly the same time
This matches the guide's recommendation: "one fork tree that ends in flat loops"
Let me write it all now.
Wait, I want to double-check one more thing. The parallel let syntax in the context of a match case:

123
Is this valid? The case body has two statements: the parallel let and the expression. Looking at the guide's pow2 example:

123
Yes, this is valid. The case body is a sequence of statements, ending with an expression.
OK, I'm confident. Writing the code now.
One last thing: I need to make sure the file structure is correct. The guide says:
LAWS.bend imports the code and states the laws
PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and proves each law
And: "bend refuses a PROOF.bend that sits beside a LAWS.bend without importing it."
So PROOF.bend must have import ./LAWS.bend as Laws (or similar).
And the proof defs must be named def Laws.law_name(...).
Let me verify this with the guide: "PROOF.bend imports LAWS.bend and proves each law with a def of the same name (law sorted is proven by def Laws.sorted)".
Yes, def Laws.sorted. So if my law is law sierpinski_apex_is_filled:, the proof is def Laws.sierpinski_apex_is_filled():.
Great. Writing now.
Actually, I realize I should also think about whether the laws need to reference the functions with the Playground. prefix. If LAWS.bend does import ./playground.bend as Playground, then in LAWS.bend, the function is Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled. And the law would be:

12
And in PROOF.bend, the proof is:

12
The proof body just needs to reduce to the same thing. Since Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) reduces to True{}, the goal {True{} == True{} : Bool} is proven by {==}.
But wait - does PROOF.bend need to import playground.bend to have access to the definitions for reduction? I think so. The checker needs to know what Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled is to reduce it. So PROOF.bend should also import playground.bend.
Let me include both imports in PROOF.bend:

123
OK, truly writing now. No more deliberation.
Let me also decide on the exact image sizes:
Mandelbrot: 60 columns, 32 rows (depth 5), max 50 iterations
Sierpinski: 32 columns, 16 rows (depth 4)
These are reasonable for ASCII art.
Actually, for the Sierpinski triangle to look good, I want the width to be at least as large as the number of rows. With 16 rows and 32 columns, the triangle occupies the left half. That's fine.
For the Mandelbrot, 60x32 is a classic terminal size. Good.
Let me write the code.
Hmm, one more potential issue: U32.from_nat(max_iterations) in the Mandelbrot character selection. max_iterations is a Nat (50n). U32.from_nat(50n) should give the U32 value 50. This is defined in Base and works by structural recursion on Nat. For 50, it'll do 50 increments. Should be fine.
But in the law, I won't be proving anything about this (since it involves the Mandelbrot iteration which uses F32). The laws are only about the Sierpinski predicate and the character selection helpers.
OK, final code:
Actually, I want to reconsider whether to include the U32.power_of_two proof. It's trivial (U32.power_of_two(0n) reduces to 1), but it adds another law. Let me include it for variety.
Laws:
sierpinski_apex_is_filled: Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(0, 0) == True{}
sierpinski_row_one_left_is_filled: Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(1, 0) == True{}
sierpinski_row_one_right_is_filled: Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(1, 1) == True{}
sierpinski_row_two_middle_is_empty: Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(2, 1) == False{}
sierpinski_row_three_second_is_filled: Playground.Sierpinski.is_filled(3, 1) == True{}
sierpinski_filled_cell_is_asterisk: Playground.Sierpinski.character_for_cell(True{}) == '*'
sierpinski_empty_cell_is_space: Playground.Sierpinski.character_for_cell(False{}) == ' '
mandelbrot_in_set_is_space: Playground.Mandelbrot.branch_on_set_membership(True{}) == ' '
mandelbrot_escaped_is_hash: Playground.Mandelbrot.branch_on_set_membership(False{}) == '#'
power_of_two_base_case: Playground.U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1
All provable by {==}.
Wait, for law 10: Playground.U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1. The type is U32. {Playground.U32.power_of_two(0n) == 1 : U32}. This reduces to {1 == 1 : U32}. Proven by {==}.
OK, writing the code now. For real. Final answer.
Let me think about one more potential issue: the Chr{42} vs '*' in laws. If I write Playground.Sierpinski.character_for_cell(True{}) == '*', the '*' is a Char literal. And character_for_cell(True{}) reduces to Chr{42}. Is '*' the same as Chr{42}? The ASCII code for '*' is 42. So yes, they should be the same. The checker should reduce '*' to Chr{42} (or vice versa). I'll use the literal for readability.
Actually, I'm not sure the checker reduces character literals to Chr{code}. Let me be safe and use Chr{42} in the laws. Or actually, let me use the literal and trust that the checker handles it. The guide shows 'c' as a Char literal, so it should be a valid term that reduces to Chr{99}.
Hmm, to be maximally safe, let me use Chr{42} in the laws. That way there's no ambiguity about literal parsing.
Actually, you know what, let me just use the literals. The guide explicitly lists 'c' as a Char literal. It should work.
OK, writing the final code now. I'll be thorough and careful.
Let me reconsider the structure one more time. The constraint says "Flat and procedural where the language allows it." My Sierpinski code is:
is_filled: one expression, flat
character_for_cell: match on parameter, flat
render_one_row: tail-recursive on Nat, flat loop
render_rows: recursive with parallel let, not flat (has parallel let) but that's the point
The Mandelbrot code has more helpers due to the match-on-computed-value rule. Each helper is noted with a comment.
I think this satisfies "flat and procedural where the language allows it" - the helpers are forced by language rules.
Writing now.
</think>
Adversarial pass
Before writing, I stress-tested the plan against the guide and Base:
F32 is opaque. Every F32 operation is a law declaration. I cannot prove anything about the Mandel
Continue.

Thinking completed
Adversarial pass
Before writing code, I stress-tested the plan against the guide and Base:
F32 opacity kills Mandelbrot proofs. Every F32 op is a law (axiom). I cannot prove anything about the Mandelbrot iteration. Laws must target the Sierpinski predicate (U32 bitwise, structurally defined) and character-selection helpers (Bool match, trivially reducible).
Match-on-computed-value rule. U32.is_eq(...), F32.is_gt(...) produce Bools I must branch on. The guide forbids matching on computed values. Every such branch needs a helper def receiving the Bool as a parameter.
Termination. U32 has no structural subterms. All loops must recurse on a Nat fuel that decreases via match n: case 0n / case 1n+rest.
Affine usage. + needed wherever a Data value is used more than once. In the parallel let, remaining_depth appears in both branches and in U32.pow, so the enclosing depth parameter must be +.
32-level Word reduction. Ground-term Sierpinski laws (e.g., sierpinski_is_filled(0,0)) require the checker to reduce Word.and and Word.cmp through 32 recursive steps. This should work (all concrete, structural), but is the highest-risk item.
U32.pow(2, remaining_depth) - Base defines U32.pow(+a: U32, n: Nat). The +a is fine since U32 is Data and 2 is a literal.
Parallel let multi-line. The shader guide shows a 4-way parallel let wrapped across two lines, so wrapping a 2-way let is safe.
"\n" as String literal. Base uses '\n' in String.lines, confirming escape sequences in Char literals. I'll use Chr{10} in code to be maximally safe, and "\n" only in the final concatenation.
Now writing the three files.
playground.bend

199200201202
LAWS.bend

1234567891011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435363738394041424344454647484950515253545556575859606162636465666768
PROOF.bend

123456789101112131415161718192021222324252627282930313233343536373839404142434445464748495051
What I verified by reading vs. what I am inferring
Verified by reading the guide and Base:
U32.and, U32.is_eq, Word.and, Word.cmp, Bool.and are all structurally defined (not law). Ground instances reduce.
F32.add, F32.mul, F32.is_gt, U32.to_f32 are all law declarations (opaque). No proofs possible about them.
Parallel let syntax a b = f(x) g(y) is valid in def bodies.
match only inspects parameters or pattern-bound variables.
Termination requires structurally smaller recursive args; Nat fuel satisfies this.
String.append / ++ is defined in Base.
U32.pow(+a: U32, n: Nat) is defined in Base.
IO.print(text: String) -> IO(Unit) exists.
do IO<Unit>: block syntax with IO.print(...) as the final statement.
Inferred (not certain):
That the checker will fully reduce 32 levels of Word.and / Word.cmp on concrete literals within a {==} proof. It should, but I cannot run the compiler.
That Chr{42}, Chr{32}, Chr{35}, Chr{10} are valid Char constructors (Base shows Chr{code: U32}).
That multi-line parallel lets are accepted (the shader guide shows one, but formatting may matter).
That U32.pow(2, remaining_depth) works with the literal 2 (U32) and a Nat second arg.
Ranked list of expected failures (most likely first)
32-level Word reduction timeout or depth limit. The {==} proofs for Sierpinski ground terms require the checker to reduce Word.and(32n, ...) and Word.cmp(32n, ...) through 32 recursive steps. If the checker has a reduction budget, these may fail or hang. Mitigation if this hits: replace Sierpinski predicate laws with even simpler ones (e.g., laws about sierpinski_character_for_cell only), or provide explicit rewrite proofs.
Affine/usage errors in mandelbrot_render_row_go or mandelbrot_escape_go. I traced + annotations carefully, but F32 values used in F32.mul(x, x) (two uses of the same variable) plus a third use in a function call may trip the checker if I miscounted. Watch for: "variable used more than once without +" errors.
Multi-line parallel let formatting. If the parser requires both branches on one physical line, the wrapped upper_rows lower_rows = ... will fail. Mitigation: put both calls on one line.
U32.pow(2, remaining_depth) type mismatch. If the checker doesn't infer 2 as U32 in this context, it may default to Nat. Mitigation: write (2 : U32) explicitly, or use U32.pow(U32.inc(U32.inc(0)), remaining_depth).
mandelbrot_character_for_depth unused parameter warning or affine error. depth and max_depth are each used once (in U32.is_eq), so no + needed. But if the checker requires explicit use of all parameters, the unused-in-body parameters of mandelbrot_branch_on_membership (I removed them in the final version, so this shouldn't apply).
do IO<Unit>: block syntax. The guide shows IO.print("Hello, world!") as the only statement. If IO.print(playground_render_all()) needs a return or the block needs explicit structure, this may fail. Mitigation: wrap in output : String = playground_render_all() then IO.print(output).
import ./playground.bend as Playground path resolution. If the compiler expects a different relative path syntax or doesn't support as aliases on local imports, LAWS.bend and PROOF.bend will fail to import. Mitigation: try import ./playground.bend without alias and use unqualified names.
Please run bend PROOF.bend first, then bend playground.bend, and paste any errors verbatim.
